>> Woodruff: TOO FAST FOR THE
TRACK.
A DEADLY DERAILMENT IS SAID TO
BE CAUSED BY AN AMTRAK TRAIN
GOING TWICE THE SPEED LIMIT.
WE GET THE LATEST FROM
PHILADELPHIA MAYOR MICHAEL
NUTTER, AND A LEAD INVESTIGATOR
INTO THE CRASH.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
NEGOTIATING TERMS FOR A MAJOR
TRADE AGREEMENT WITH ASIA.
WE TALK ABOUT WHAT'S NEXT ...
WITH TWO KEY PLAYERS ON OPPOSITE
SIDES OF THE TRADE WARS:
SENATORS ORRIN HATCH AND
ELIZABETH WARREN.
>> Woodruff: PLUS...
>> I WAS PRETTY MUCH ALLOWED TO
WEAR WHAT I WANTED, EXCEPT ON
SCHOOL PICTURES I HAD TO WEAR A
DRESS AND I HATED IT.
>> Woodruff: TRANSGENDER AT AN
EARLY AGE.
SCIENTISTS TRACE BIOLOGY'S
INFLUENCE OVER GENDER IDENTITY
FOR CHILDREN.
>> THIS ISN'T JUST A THING A KID
IS SAYING OR PRETENDING TO BE,
THIS IS REALLY TRULY HOW THE
CHILD SEEMS TO IDENTIFY
THEMSELVES AT THIS AGE.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: SEVEN DEAD, MORE
THAN 200 INJURED, AT LEAST TEN
IN CRITICAL CONDITION.
THE CATALOG OF CASUALTIES GREW
TODAY IN THE AMTRAK DISASTER IN
PHILADELPHIA.
AT THE SAME TIME, POTENTIALLY
CRUCIAL EVIDENCE BEGAN TO
EMERGE.
>> Woodruff: DAYLIGHT BROUGHT
THE DERAILMENT CLEARLY INTO
FOCUS: A SCENE OF MANGLED METAL,
WITH ALL SEVEN CARS OF THE
"NORTHEAST REGIONAL" OFF THE
TRACKS.
SEARCH TEAMS WERE ALREADY BUSY,
AND THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD SAID THEY'D
RECOVERED THE DATA RECORDERS.
THE TRAIN DERAILED SHORTLY AFTER
9:00 P.M., ON ITS WAY FROM
WASHINGTON TO NEW YORK WITH 238
PASSENGERS AND FIVE CREW MEMBERS
ON BOARD.
THEY WERE PASSING THROUGH THE
PORT RICHMOND SECTION OF
PHILADELPHIA EN TWHHE TRAIN HIT
A CURVE AND CAREENED OUT OF
CONTROL.
>> SUDDENLY, THE TRAIN WENT DARK
AND THEN IT SEEMED LIKE SOMEONE
HAD SLAMMED THE BRAKES, AND
EVERYTHING STARTED SHAKING.
PEOPLE WERE JUST KIND OF
PANICKING, AND I COULD SMELL THE
SMELL OF SMOKE.
>> I COULD SEE THE BLOOD ON
PEOPLE'S FACES.
THEY CAN'T MOVE, THEIR KNEES
WERE OUT, SO I JUST TRIED TO DO
MY BEST TO HELP PEOPLE GET OUT
OF THAT CAR BECAUSE IT WAS
SMOKING.
>> Woodruff: THE N.T.S.B. SAID
THIS AFTERNOON THE TRAIN WAS
MOVING AT MORE THAN 100 MILES-
AN-HOUR, ON A CURVE WHERE THE
SPEED LIMIT DROPS TO 70, THEN
50.
>> JUST MOMENTS BEFORE THE
DERAILMENT, THE TRAIN WAS PLACED
INTO ENGINEER-INDUCED BRAKING,
AND THIS MEANS THAT THE ENGINEER
APPLIED FULL EMERGENCY-- FULL
EMERGENCY BRAKE APPLICATION.
WHEN THE ENGINEER-INDUCED BRAKE
APPLICATION WAS APPLIED, THE
TRAIN WAS TRAVELING AT
APPROXIMATELY 106 MILES PER HO
HOUR.
THREE SECONDS LATER, WHEN THE
DATA TO THE RECORDERS
TERMINATED, THE TRAIN SPEED WAS
102 MILES PER
>> Woodruff: IN ADDITION, THE
FEDERAL RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION
SAID INSPECTORS HAD CHECKED THE
TRACKS HOURS EARLIER, AND FOUND
NO DEFECTS.
IN THE WRECK'S IMMEDIATE
AFTERMATH, PASSENGERS WORKED IN
THE CHAOS AND DARKNESS TO AID
OTHERS.
FORMER PENNSYLVANIA CONGRESSMAN
PATRICK MURPHY WAS AMONG THEM.
>> MILITARY TRAINING JUST KICKED
IN AND THE GUY NEXT TO ME WAS
UNCONSCIOUS, SO I JUST PICKED
HIM, SLAPPED IN THE FACE A
LITTLE BIT AND SAID GET UP AND
HE CAME TO AND WE WERE OK, THERE
WAS JUST A LOT OF BLOOD AND LOT
OF PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: IN A STATEMENT,
PRESIDENT OBAMA CALLED IT A
TRAGEDY THAT TOUCHED EVERYONE IN
A PART OF THE COUNTRY, WHERE
"AMTRAK IS A WAY OF LIFE FOR
MANY."
THE SHUT-DOWN OF RAIL SERVICE
BETWEEN NEW YORK AND
PHILADELPHIA AFFECTED AMTRAK'S
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR, SERVING MORE
THAN 11 MILLION PEOPLE A DAY.
THAT MEANT THOUSANDS OF WOULD-BE
RAIL-RIDERS WERE STRANDED IN
BOSTON, NEW YORK, WASHINGTON AND
POINTS IN BETWEEN, AND SEARCHING
FOR WAYS OUT.
>> AT 7:00 IN THE MORNING, THEY
WOKE US UP AND TOLD US ABOUT
EVERYTHING AND THEY SAY WHENEVER
YOU GET OFF IN WASHINGTON D.C.
THEY ARE GOING TO BUS YOU TO NEW
YORK.
NOW THEY ARE SAYING THEY DON'T
HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH BUSES.
>> Woodruff: AND AS RAIL
PASSENGERS HUNTED FOR
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION,
INVESTIGATORS HUNTED FOR
ANSWERS.
NOT ONLY WHAT HAPPENED BUT WHY
IT HAPPENED SO THAT WE CAN
PREVENT IT FROM HAPPENING AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: PHILADELPHIA
POLICE AND THE TRAIN'S ENGINEER
DECLINED TO TALK TO THRKTZ BUT
AMTRAK'S CHAIRMAN PLEDGED FULL
COOPERATION
PHILADELPHIA POLICE SAID THE
TRAIN'S ENGINEER DECLINED TO
TALK TO AUTHORITIES.
BUT, AMTRAK'S CHAIRMAN PLEDGED
FULL COOPERATION WITH THE
INVESTIGATION.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO
PHILADELPHIA MAYOR MICHAEL
NUTTER.
I SPOKE TO HIM A SHORT TIME AGO.
MAYOR NUTTER, THANK YOU FOR
TALKING WITH US.
TELL US WHAT IT'S LIKE DEALING
WITH THIS.
I KNOW YOU'VE HAD OTHER
ACCIDENTS, CRISIS IN CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA.
HOW DOES THIS COMPARE?
>> I DON'T THINK WE'VE HAD
ANYTHING THAT IS COMPARABLE.
I MEAN, WE'VE NEVER HAD A
DERAILMENT LIKE THIS IN RECENT
TIMES, BUT THE LEVEL OF
DEVASTATION, THE LOSS OF LIFE,
AGAIN, TRAGICALLY, WE HAVE-- I
HAVE TO CONFIRM SEVEN PASSENGERS
DECEASED ON THAT TRAIN.
BUT THE MIRACLE OF A FEW
HUNDRED, PRETTY MUCH WALKING OFF
OF THAT TRAIN LAST NIGHT.
I WAS OUT HERE LAST NIGHT AND
SAW MANY OF THE PEOPLE WHO CAME
OFF OF THAT TRAIN.
THE CARS THEMSELVES, IT IS
BEYOND ANYTHING THAT YOU WOULD
SEE IN A DISASTER MOVIE.
THE CARS ARE MANGLED, TURNED
UPSIDE DOWN, TURNED SIDEWAYS.
THE ENGINE SEPARATED, AND IT
JUST MUST HAVE BEEN A HORRIFIC
SCENE AND EXPERIENCE FOR THOSE
PASSENGERS.
BUT WE HAVE AN INCREDIBLE LEVEL
OF COORDINATION ON THE GROUND
HERE.
THE PHILADELPHIA FIRE DEPARTMENT
IS IN COMMAND OF THE SCENE.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IS
SUPPORTING.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY AS A PART OF THE
PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT.
AMTRAK, STATE POLICE, N.T.S.B.
NOW ON THE GROUND CONDUCTING
THEIR INVESTIGATION.
SO IT'S A FULL-BLOWN
INVESTIGATION.
WE'RE STILL SEARCHING FOR SOME
OF THE PASSENGERS FROM THE
MANIFEST THAT AMTRAK PROVIDED TO
US.
SO EVERYBODY IS DOING WHAT
THEY'RE SUPPOSE TO BE DOING, AND
WE'RE PRAYING FOR ALL THESE
PASSENGERS.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S WHAT I
WANTED TO ASK YOU ABOUT.
HOW IS THE RESCUE EFFORT GOING
AT THIS POINT?
I MEAN, HOW MANY IS ARE STILL
UNACCOUNTED FOR IN.
>> WELL, WE DON'T HAVE A HARD
COUNT ON THAT AND THE REASON IS
BECAUSE THE MANIFEST, OF COURSE,
THAT'S THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO
ACTUALLY BOUGHT A TICKET.
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN
ALL OF THOSE INDIVIDUALS
ACTUALLY WERE ON THE TRAIN.
OBVIOUSLY, SOMETIMES PEOPLE MISS
TRAINS.
SOME OF THE AMTRAK PERSONNEL
COULD HAVE GOTTEN ON THE TRAIN,
YOU KNOW, WITHOUT-- OBVIOUSLY
THEY DON'T HAVE TICKETS
NECESSARILY FOR THEIR OWN
PERSONNEL.
SO WE'RE COMPARING THE MANIFEST
TO ALL THE INDIVIDUALS THAT WE
TRANSPORTED LAST NIGHT OR PEOPLE
WHO CHECKED IN AT THE HOSPITALS,
EITHER ON THEIR OWN OR THAT WE
TOOK THEM, AND SO THAT IS THE
STEP-BY-STEP PROCESS THAT WE'RE
GOING THROUGH.
AND, AGAIN, UNFORTUNATELY, SEVEN
CONFIRMED DEAD AND WE'RE GOING
THROUGH THE NOTIFICATION PROCESS
WITH THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Woodruff: MAYOR NUTTER, WE
JUST LEARNED THE N.T.S.B.
CONFIRMING THAT THE TRAIN WAS
GOING 106 MILES AN HOUR ON THIS
STRETCH OF TRACK BEFORE THIS
HAPPENED.
WHAT'S YOUR REACTION TO THAT?
I MEAN, THIS IS A-- THIS IS YOUR
CITY.
>> WELL, THERE ARE, OBVIOUSLY,
REGULATIONS FROM AN AMTRAK
STANDPOINT CHIRK BELIEVE IS
GOVERNED BY THE FEDERAL RAILWAY
ADMINISTRATION.
SO, I MEAN, IT'S NOT LIKE THE
CITY OF PHILADELPHIA GOVERNMENT
IS IN CHARGE OF AMTRAK.
BUT THE TRAGEDY TOOK PLACE HERE.
IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT THAT
STRETCH OF THE TRACK AND THAT
CURVE HAS A 50-MILE-PER-HOUR
SPEED LIMIT ON IT.
SO, OBVIOUSLY, SOMETHING WENT
COMPLETELY WRONG IN THAT
PARTICULAR CASE.
I'LL LEAVE IT, OBVIOUSLY, TO
N.T.S.B. TO DETERMINE WHY THAT
HAPPENED, HOW DID THAT HAPPEN?
I THINK THEY'RE STILL GATHERING
THAT INFORMATION.
I MEAN, THAT WOULD CERTAINLY
EXPLAIN-- THAT LEVEL OF SPEED AT
THAT PART OF THE TRACK WOULD
CERTAINLY EXPLAIN WHY THERE WAS
SO MUCH DEVASTATION TO THIS
PARTICULAR TRAIN AND HOW IT
SEPARATED FROM THE ENGINE AND
ALL THE OTHER THINGS THAT WE'VE
SEEN DOWN AT THE CRASH SITE OR
THE DERAILMENT SITE, RATHER.
SO THAT'S N.T.S.B.'S
JURISDICTION.
I'LL TAKE THEM AT THEIR WORD.
>> Woodruff: WHAT SORT OF
OTHER CONCERNS HAVE YOU HAD
BEFORE THIS ACCIDENT ABOUT
AMTRAK, ABOUT THE TRACKS, ABOUT
THE INFRASTRUCTURE ASSOCIATED
WITH THIS RAIL LINE IN YOUR
CITY?
>> WELL, I MEAN, LOOK, I'M A
HUGE AMTRAK SUPPORTER OF THIS
ENTIRE CORRIDOR AND OF AMTRAK AS
AN ORGANIZATION.
I'VE BEEN ON THAT 7:10 TRAIN OUT
OF WASHINGTON, D.C.
I'M ON AMTRAK ALL THE TIME,
GOING TO NEW YORK OR WASHINGTON,
OR HAVE GONE FROM PHILADELPHIA
TO NEW YORK TOW D.C. AND BACK TO
PHILADELPHIA.
TODAY, OF COURSE, IS A DAY WHERE
WE'RE REALLY TRYING TO BE
RESPECTFUL OF THE FAMILIES.
I'D LOVE TO TALK.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC POLICY
AND ALL THOSE KINDS OF ISSUES
BUT FOR THE MOMENT WE'RE GOING
TO HOLD OUR RESPECT FOR THESE
FAMILIES AND THOSE WHO ARE
INJURED AND LEAVE THE POLICY AND
THE POLITICS TO ANOTHER DAY.
>> Woodruff: MAYOR MICHAEL
NUTTER, WE THANK YOU FOR JOINING
US, AND I KNOW OUR HEARTS GO OUT
TO THOSE WHO ARE AFFECTED.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL HEAR FROM A
TOP FEDERAL SAFETY INVESTIGATOR,
AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
IN THE DAY'S OTHER NEWS,
PRESIDENT OBAMA WELCOMED SAUDI
ARABIAN LEADERS TO THE WHITE
HOUSE TODAY, AMID A DISPUTE OVER
A POTENTIAL NUCLEAR DEAL WITH
IRAN.
SAUDI KING SALMAN DECLINED TO
MAKE THE TRIP TO ATTEND A SIX-
NATION GULF ARAB SUMMIT.
INSTEAD, THE CROWN PRINCE AND
DEPUTY CROWN PRINCE MET WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
AND, HE PRAISED THE SAUDIS,
WHILE INDIRECTLY ACKNOWLEDGING
THE TENSIONS.
>> THE UNITED STATES AND SAUDI
ARABIA HAVE AN EXTRAORDINARY
FRIENDSHIP AND RELATIONSHIP THAT
DATES BACK TO FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT
AND KING FAISAL.
AND WE ARE CONTINUING TO BUILD
THAT RELATIONSHIP DURING A VERY
CHALLENGING TIME.
>> Woodruff: IN ADDITION TO
IRAN, THE SUMMIT WILL ALSO FOCUS
ON YEMEN, WHERE THE SAUDIS AND
THEIR SUNNI ALLIES ARE TRYING TO
BEAT BACK SHIITE REBELS.
A CEASE-FIRE BEGAN TODAY, BUT
THERE WERE VIOLATIONS ALMOST
IMMEDIATELY.
MEANWHILE, IRAN WARNED THE
SAUDIS AGAINST INTERCEPTING AN
AID SHIP HEADING TO A REBEL PORT
IN YEMEN.
A TOP GENERAL IN TEHRAN SAID:
"IF THEY CAUSE TROUBLE WITH
REGARD TO SENDING HUMANITARIAN
AID, IT WILL SPARK A FIRE..."
ATTACKERS STRUCK A HOTEL THIS
EVENING IN KABUL, AFGHANISTAN
DURING A PARTY FOR FOREIGNERS.
THE U.S. EMBASSY SAID ONE
AMERICAN WAS KILLED.
THERE WAS WORD SEVERAL DOZEN
PEOPLE WERE BEING HELD HOSTAGE.
THE ATTACK TRIGGERED A GUN
BATTLE WITH POLICE THAT
CONTINUED INTO THE NIGHT.
IN PAKISTAN, GUNMEN STORMED A
BUS IN KARACHI, ORDERED SHIITE
MUSLIM PASSENGERS TO BOW THEIR
HEADS, THEN OPENED FIRE.
AT LEAST 45 WERE KILLED.
THE BUS WAS HEADED TO A
COMMUNITY CENTER WHEN SIX
ATTACKERS FORCED THEIR WAY ON.
A WITNESS SAID AT LEAST ONE
GUNMAN WORE A POLICE UNIFORM.
A TALIBAN SPLINTER GROUP AND A
FACTION ALLIED WITH THE ISLAMIC
STATE MADE COMPETING CLAIMS OF
RESPONSIBILITY.
THE POLITICAL UNREST IN BURUNDI
TOOK A NEW TURN TODAY, WHEN AN
ARMY GENERAL ANNOUNCED A COUP.
HE MADE HIS MOVE AS THE
PRESIDENT WAS AT A SUMMIT IN
TANZANIA, ON THE RISING TURMOIL
IN HIS EAST AFRICAN NATION.
IN HIS EAST AFRICAN NATION. >> (
translated): PRESIDENT
>> (translated):
PRESIDENT PIERRE NKURUNZIZA HAS
BEEN
PIERRE NKURUNZIZA HAS BEEN
RELIEVED OF HIS DUTIES, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN DISSOLVED.
WE DEMAND THAT ALL REGIONAL
COMMANDERS, REGIONAL
COMMISSIONERS AND ALL GOVERNORS
WORK HAND IN HAND WITH US TO
REINFORCE THE SECURITY FOR THE
CITIZENS OF BURUNDI AND FOR ALL
FOREIGNERS, RESIDENTS, AND ALL
VISITORS.
>> Woodruff: LATER, THE
PRESIDENT TWEETED THAT HE'S
STILL IN POWER.
HIS PLANS TO SEEK A THIRD TERM
HAVE SPARKED WEEKS OF PROTESTS
AND VIOLENCE, AND NEWS OF THE
COUP ATTEMPT SENT THOUSANDS
STREAMING INTO THE STREETS OF
THE CAPITAL CITY, DANCING AND
CHEERING.
THE U.S. AND THE U.N. APPEALED
FOR CALM.
THE DEATH TOLL FROM NEPAL'S
LATEST EARTHQUAKE IS NOW AT
LEAST 76.
2,700 OTHERS WERE INJURED
YESTERDAY IN THE HIMALAYAN
NATION'S SECOND MAJOR QUAKE IN
THREE WEEKS.
MEANWHILE, A SEARCH CONTINUED
FOR A U.S. MARINE CORPS
HELICOPTER THAT DISAPPEARED
WHILE DELIVERING AID.
THAILAND'S MILITARY RULERS TOOK
A HARD LINE TODAY IN A
BURGEONING CRISIS OVER MIGRANTS
AT SEA.
THEY INSISTED THEY'LL KEEP
PUSHING THE BOATS BACK TO SEA,
AND, A TOP OFFICIAL IN MALAYSIA
SAID THE SAME.
MIGRANT ORGANIZATIONS SAY 6,000
OR MORE PEOPLE FROM BANGLADESH
AND MYANMAR MAY NOW BE STRANDED
AT SEA.
THE VATICAN HAS FORMALLY
RECOGNIZED THE "STATE OF
PALESTINE" IN A NEW TREATY.
THE HOLY SEE TODAY JOINED
SEVERAL EUROPEAN COUNTRIES IN
TAKING THAT STEP, DESPITE
ISRAEL'S OBJECTIONS.
POPE FRANCIS WILL MEET WITH
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS LATER THIS WEEK.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, THE HOUSE
PASSED A BILL LATE TODAY THAT
BANS MOST ABORTIONS AFTER 20
WEEKS OF PREGNANCY.
IT MAKES AN EXCEPTION IN CASES
OF RAPE OR INCEST, BUT REQUIRES
WOMEN TO RECEIVE COUNSELING
FIRST.
THE DEBATE ON THE HOUSE FLOOR
SPLIT LARGELY DOWN PARTY LINES.
>> HOW INCREDIBLY CRUEL IT IS
THAT WE WANT TO TAKE THAT
DECISION FROM AWAY THE WOMAN AND
HER DOCTOR, WHOMEVER SHE WANTS
TO CONSULT BUT CERTAINLY
SCIENTIFIC LAWS OUGHT TO APPLY,
TO PUT IT IN THE HANDS OF
LEGISLATORS?
>> THIS IS INCREDIBLE THAT WE
HAVE TO EVEN COME FORWARD AND
DEBATE THIS.
THIS IS JUST SO INTUITIVE, NOT
AS A REPUBLICAN OR DEMOCRATS BUT
AS HUMAN BEINGS.
WE HAVE TO PROTECT THE UNBORN
BECAUSE THEY CANNOT PROTECT
THEMSELVES.
>> Woodruff: REPUBLICAN LEADERS
DROPPED PROVISIONS THAT HAD
ANGERED A NUMBER OF G.O.P.
WOMEN.
THE BILL NOW MOVES TO THE
SENATE, BUT IT'S UNLIKELY TO
PASS THERE.
THERE WERE PEACEFUL PROTESTS IN
MADISON, WISCONSIN TODAY AFTER A
PROSECUTOR DECIDED NOT TO CHARGE
A WHITE OFFICER FOR KILLING
AN UNARMED TEENAGER.
DEMONSTRATORS GATHERED NEAR THE
APARTMENT HOUSE WHERE 19-YEAR-
OLD TONY ROBINSON WAS SHOT IN
MARCH.
FROM THERE THEY MARCHED TO THE
COUNTY COURTHOUSE TO STAGE A
MOCK TRIAL.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, NEW DATA
UNDERSCORED JUST HOW MUCH
CHINA'S ECONOMY IS SLOWING DOWN.
THE COUNTRY'S MONEY SUPPLY GREW
IN APRIL AT THE LOWEST PACE
EVER.
AND, INVESTMENT GROWTH WAS THE
WORST IN NEARLY 15 YEARS.
ON WALL STREET, THE MAJOR
INDEXES WERE LITTLE CHANGED ON
THE DAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST SEVEN POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,060.
THE NASDAQ ROSE FIVE POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED LESS
THAN A POINT.
AND, HONEY BEES DISAPPEARED AT A
STAGGERING RATE OVER THE LAST 12
MONTHS.
THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
REPORTS BEEKEEPERS LOST MORE
THAN 40% OF THEIR COLONIES.
THE STUDY AUTHORS BLAMED
PESTICIDES, LOSS OF FOOD AND
TINY MITES THAT ATTACK THE BEES.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
SEARCHING FOR ANSWERS INTO THE
DEADLY AMTRAK ACCIDENT.
LAWMAKERS DEBATE WHAT'S NEXT FOR
SCIENCE EXPLORES THE BIOLOGICAL
INFLUENCES ON GENDER IDENTITY AT
AN EARLY AGE.
AND A NEW BOOK OF POETRY FROM
ONE OF THE NEWSHOUR'S OWN.
>> Woodruff: LET'S GET MORE ON
>> THE SUBJECT OF A FIERCE
DEBATE OVER A PROPOSED PACT WITH
ASIA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND SUPPORTERS
OF SUCH A DEAL RAN INTO A
ROADBLOCK YESTERDAYHEN W A TEST
VOTE FAILED UNEXPECTEDLY IN THE
SENATE AFTER OPPOSITION FROM
DEMOCRATS.
IT WAS JUST THE OPENING BID OF
AN EFFORT TO GIVE THE PRESIDENT
AUTHORITY TO SO-CALLED FAST
TRACK A DEAL THAT CONGRESS COULD
BUT NOT AMEND.
TODAY, LAWMAKERS ANNOUNCED A
COMPROMISE TO LET THAT VOTE
HAPPEN, BUT IT SIGNALED JUST HOW
TOUGH IT COULD BE TO GET A MUCH
BIGGER TRADE DEAL DONE.
WE TALKED TO TWO LEADING PLAYERS
ON CAPITOL HILL WHO WILL
INFLUENCE THE FINAL OUTCOME.
FIRST, REPUBLICAN SENATOR HATCH
OF UTAH.
HE'S A COSPONSOR OF THE FAST
TRACK LEGISLATION.
WELCOME, SENATOR HATCH.
I GUESS MY FIRST QUESTION IS HAS
THIS COMPROMISED BEEN REACHED
TODAY PURELY ON PROCEDURAL
GROUNDS OR HAS EITHER SIDE GIVEN
IN ON THE SUBSTANCE?
>> WELL, NO, IT'S BASICALLY A
PROCEDURAL COMPROMISE, BUT IT'S
WHAT WE WANTED TO BEGIN WITH,
AND THAT IS TO HAVE THE FOUR
BILLS BROUGHT UP AND VOTED UPON
INDIVIDUALLY.
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO START WITH
THE PREFERENCES BILL, AND THEN
WE'LL START WITH A-- ALCOHOL
INCLUDE THE AFRICAN FREE TRADE
AGREEMENT AND OTHERS, AND HAITI
AS WELL, AND THEN WE'RE GOING TO
GO TO THE-- TO ONE OF THE-- TO
THE CUSTOMS BILL, AND THEN WE'LL
DISPOSE OF THOSE.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE 60 VOTES EACH
TOPAZ THOSE.
I THINK THEY BOTH WILL PASS.
AND THEN WE GO TO TRADE
PROMOTION AUTHORITY BILL WHICH,
OF COURSE,-- AND TRADE
ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
THE TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY
BILL IS ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT BILLS IN OUR COUNTRY'S
HISTORY.
IT'S BEEN A DECADE SINCE WE HAVE
DONE A TRADE AGREEMENT SUCH AS
THIS ONE.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT SOME OF THE BASIC TENET OF
THIS ONE.
AS YOU KNOW, OPPONENTS SAID YES,
THERE MAY BE SOME JOBS CREATED
IN THE SHORT TERM, BUT IN THE
LONGER RUN, IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT
HAPPENED WITH NAFTA, THE NORTH
AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT,
OVER TIME MANY JOBS WERE LOST.
THEY HAVE DONE STUDIES AND SAID
HOUND OF JOBS, MAYBE A MILLION
JOBS WERE LOST.
HOW DO YOU COUNTER THAT
ARGUMENT?
>> OVER TIME, THE NAFTA BILL
CREATED MILLIONS OF JOBS, TOO.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS, IS
THAT THIS BILL WILL PROBABLY DO
EVEN BETTER THAN THAT BECAUSE WE
HAVE TO BE IN THE REAL WORLD.
THIS BILL WILL ENABLE THE TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE TO NEGOTIATE
AGREEMENTS ON WHAT'S CALLED
T.P.P., THE TRADE PROMOTION
AUTHORITY-- SKEW SKEWS ME, THE
TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP, AND
THAT INVOLVES 11 NATION PLUS OUR
OWN.
AND THE T-TIP OF 28 NATIONS PLUS
THEIR OWN, PUTTING US ON AN
EQUAL FOOTING IN MANY RESPECTS
TO EVERYTHING IN THOSE COUNTRIES
AND OPENING THE DOOR TO FREE
TRADE FROM OUR COUNTRY TO
THEIRS.
IT COULD AMOUNT TO TRILLIONS OF
DOLLARS OVER THE YEARS AND FREE
TRADE BENEFITS TO THE UNITED
STATES AND I THINK IT WILL
CREATE A TREMENDOUS NUMBER OF
JOBS.
>> Woodruff: SENATOR, I THINK
AS YOU KNOW, MANY AMERICANS HAVE
COME OVER TIME TO ASSOCIATE A
TRADE DEAL WITH A DRANK OF JOBS
OUT OF THE UNITED STATES.
HOW DO YOU TURN THAT IMPRESSION
AROUND?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, THE
IMPRESSION IS FALSE.
THERE WERE SOME JOBS LOST UNDER
NAFTA, LIKE SOME TEXTILE JOBS
AND SO FORTH, BUT THERE WERE A
LOT OF JOBS THAT WERE CREATED
UNDER NAFTA, TOO.
AND ANYBODY WHO SAYS OTHERWISE
IS JUST NOT TELLING THE TRUTH.
IN THIS PARTICULAR CASE, WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT TRILLIONS OF
DOLLARS OF FREE TODAY OVER THE
YEARS, AND UNITED STATES, YOU
KNOW, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT UP TO
40% TO 60% OF THE WORLD TRADE.
UN, 95% OF TRADE PEOPLE LIVE
OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
AND WE'VE GOT TO BE IN THE REAL
WORLD WHERE WE CAN TRADE WITH
ALL THESE OTHER COUNTRIES AND
RECEIVE ALL THE BENEFITS OF
THOSE FREE FRAYED AGREEMENTS.
THE PRESIDENT HAPPENS TO BE
RIGHT ON THIS.
ELIZABETH WARREN, SHE'S A NICE
PERSON AND WE'RE FRIENDS, BUT IN
ALL HONESTY, THE PRESIDENT IS
RIGHT ON THIS AND HE DESERVES
SUPPORT, AND I'M SUPPORTING HIM,
AND HOPEFULLY WE'LL GET THESE
BILLS THROUGH.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED
SENATOR WARREN AND WE ARE GOING
TO BE TALKING TO HER RIGHT AFTER
WE TALK WITH YOU.
BUT ONE OF HER MAIN OBJECTIONS
IS THE SECRECY THAT HAS
SURROUNDED THIS, THE FACT THAT
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE CAN'T LOOK
AT THE TERMS OF THIS DEAL, THAT
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS HAVE TO GO
INTO A CLOSED ROOM, CAN'T TAKE
ANY NOTES OUT, BUT MAINLY THAT
IT'S NOT IN THE PUBLIC EYE AND
THAT ONCE CONGRESS PASSES THIS
SO-CALLED FAST TRACK AUTHORITY
FOR THE PRESIDENT, WHATEVER IS
DONE CAN'T BE AMENDED.
>> WELL, WAIT A MINUTE.
WHAT THIS BILL DOES IS IT
PROVIDES A PROCEDURAL MECHANISM
WHERE CONGRESS CAN GET INTO ALL
OF THOSE ISSUES ONCE WE PASS
THIS BILL.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S THE WAY WE
CAN HAVE TOTAL TRANSPARENCY.
PLUS, THE REASON THAT THEY'RE--
YOU CAN-- MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
AND THEIR STAFFS CAN GO SEE
THESE MATTERS REET NOW, BUT THE
REASON THEY'RE SO TIGHTLY
CONTROLLED IS BECAUSE THEY
HAVEN'T ENTERED INTO THEM YET.
THEY'VE GOT TO COMPLETE THEM.
I DON'T WANT PEOPLE TEARING THEM
DOWN BEFORE THEY ACTUALLY GET
THEM DONE.
WHEN THEY'RE DONE, WE'LL BE ABLE
TO LOOK AT THEM AND KNOW EVERY
ASPECT OF THEM.
IT WILL BE T.P.P. THAT PROVIDES
THE MECHANISM FUR US TO LOOK AT
THOSE.
I THINK SOMETIMES PEOPLE GET
NIXED UP ON, YOU KNOW, THE TRADE
AGREEMENTS-- THE TRANS-PACIFIC
PARTNERSHIP, FOR AN EXAMPLE,
THEY GET MIXED UP ON THAT WHEN
THAT IS CURRENTLY BEING
NEGOTIATED AND FORGET THAT THE--
THAT THE TRADE BILL THAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT PROVIDES THE
MECHANISM WHEREBY WE CAN ENTER
INTO THESE AGREEMENTS AND GET
THEM TO CORRESPOND WITH WHAT
AMERICA REALLY NEED AND WHAT
AMERICA REALLY DESERVES.
>> Woodruff: WELL, AS YOU
KNOW, THE ARGUMENT THAT SHE'S
MAKING THOUGH IS THAT AT THIS
POINT, THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE
SHUT OUT OF THIS VERY IMPORTANT
DEBATE.
LET ME FINALLY ASK YOU THIS --
>> LET ME JUST ANSWER THAT
BECAUSE THAT'S NOT A GOOD POINT.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS, IS
THAT ALL OF THIS-- THIS-- THIS
TRADE AGREEMENT WILL REQUIRE
TRANSPARENCY AND WILL GIVE THE
CONGRESS THE ABILITY TO REALLY
LOOK INTO ANY MATTER THAT-- ANY
TREATY THEY ENTERED INTO.
AND THIS IS THE WAY WE GET
THERE.
AND FOR PEOPLE TO FIGHT THIS,
THIS IS THE ONE WAY THAT THOSE
WHO ARE CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT
GOES ON AND ALL OF US SHOULD BE,
WILL BE ABLE TO REALLY LOOK AT
THESE MATTERS AND COME TO SOME
REALLY INFORMATIVE AND GOOD
CONCLUSIONS.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK THIS
ULTIMATELY WILL PASS?
>> OH, YEAH, I REALLY DO.
I THINK WE HAVE THE VOTE TO PASS
IT.
IT'S GOING TO BEUE KNOW, IT'S
GOING TO BE HARD FOUGHT.
THERE'S NO QUESTION SOME PEOPLE
JUST HATE THE CONCEPT OF FREE
TRADE AUTHORITY, AND, FRANKLY,
AT LEAST TWO OF THEM ARE GOING
TO FIGHT IT WITH EVERYTHING
THEY'VE GOT.
AND THEY HAVE THAT RIGHT.
I HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH THAT.
BUT THEN AGAIN, WE HAVE TO ALSO
ACT IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE
COUNTRY, AND REALLY, THIS BILL
IS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
BILLS IN THIS PRESIDENT'S MOST
TENURE.
HE HAPPENS TO BE RIGHT TO, AND I
SUPPORT HIM IN THIS IT, AND I
THINK THE VAST MAJORITY OF
REPUBLICANS WILL WIND UP
SUPPORTING THE PRESIDENT ON
TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY.
>> Woodruff: SENATOR ORRIN
HATCH, WE THANK YOU.
>> YOU BET.
>> Woodruff: LET'S HEAR NOW
FROM ONE OF THE MORE VOCAL
OPPONENTS IN THIS FIGHT, SENATOR
ELIZABETH WARREN OF
MASSACHUSETTS.
SHE IS A DEMOCRAT WHO HAS
CLASHED OVER THIS ISSUE WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
SHE IS ONE OF THE LEADING VOICES
OF THE LEFT.
SENATOR WAR KNOW, WE WELCOME YOU
TO THE PROGRAM.
NOW THAT THEY CLEARED THE
PROCEDURAL HURDLES TODAY, IS IT
YOUR CONCERN THAT THE
APPROPRIATES OF THIS TRADE
LEGISLATION ARE NOW GOING TO BE
ABLE TO MOVE AHEAD AND PASS IT
ALL?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, I AM
CONCERNED ABOUT THAT.
BECAUSE I AM VERY CONCERNED THAT
WE ARE GOING TO PASS A TRADE
PROMOTION AUTHORITY THAT
DPREESES THE SKID FOR A DEAL
THAT IS REALLY GOOD FOR SOME OF
THE BIGGEST MULTINATIONAL
CORPORATIONS IN THE WORLD BUT
NOT SO GOOD FOR THE AMERICAN
WORKER.
>> Woodruff: WELL, LET ME JUST
QUOTE-- THERE ARE MANY I COULD
QUOTE BUT WE JUST HEARD SENATOR
HATCH SAY IN A COUPLE OF ANSWERS
THAT HE BELIEVES STRONGLY WHAT
THIS IS GOING TO DO IS IT'S GOG,
YES, CORPORATIONS ARE GOING TO
MAKE MONEY BUT THEY'RE ALSO
GOING TO BE CREATING JOBS AND
THE IDEA THAT THE TRADE
AGREEMENTS OF THE PAST TOOK JOBS
AWAY IS JUST NOT TRUE.
>> WELL, NOW, THERE'S A LOT OF
DATA ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENED IN
THE TRADE AGREEMENTS OF THE
PAST, AND THE AMERICAN WORKER
HAS NOT DONE WELL.
WHAT WORRIES ME HERE IS ABOUT
THE WHOLE PROCESS AROUND THIS
TRADE AGREEMENT.
YOU KNOW, IT HAS BEEN NEGOTIATED
IN SECRET, BUT THERE HAVE BEEN
28 WORKING GROUPS THAT HAVE
WORKED ON SPECIFIC PARTS OF IT.
BUT THOSE 28 WORKING GROUPS,
THEY HAVE ALL TOGETHER MORE THAN
500 PEOPLE WHO ARE INVOLVED IN
THEM.
85% OF THOSE PEOPLE ARE EITHER
SENIOR EXECUTIVES IN THE
INDUSTRIES THAT WILL BE AFFECTED
OR THEY'RE LOBBYISTS FOR THOSE
INDUSTRIES.
IN OTHER WORDS, THE PEOPLE
WHO'VE BEEN WHISPERING IN THE
EAR OF OUR NEGOTIATORS WHO HAVE
BEEN HELPING SHAPE IT, WHO HAVE
READ EVERY DRAFT AND HELPED MARK
IT UP, ALL REPRESENT BIG,
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS, NOT
THE AMERICAN WORKER.
AND MY VIEW ON THIS IS WHEN YOU
HAVE A TILTED PROCESS, YOU END
UP WITH A TILTED OUTCOME.
>> Woodruff: WELL, AS YOU
KNOW, SENATOR, WHEN PRESIDENT
OBAMA HAS BEEN ASKED ABOUT THIS,
AND HE'S WORKING PRETTY HARD TO
GET THIS LEGISLATION PASSED,
HE'S MADE THE OPPOSITE ARGUMENT
THAT IN NO WAY IS HE OUT THERE
DEFENDING THE BIG CORPORATIONS
THAT HE'S LOOKING OUT AFTER
ORDINARY AMERICANS AND ABOUT
CREATING JOBS FOR GENERATIONS TO
COME.
>> YOU KNOW, IF THE PRESIDENT IS
CONFIDENT THAT THIS IS A GREAT
TRADE DEAL FOR AMERICAN
FAMILIES, THEN THE PRESIDENT
SHOULD LET THAT TRADE DEAL BE
PUBLIC.
LET THE AMERICAN PEOPLE SEE IT
BEFORE WE VOTE THIS WEEK, NEXT
WEEK, THE WEEK AFTER, TO GREASE
THE SKID, TO MAKE IT MUCH EASIER
TO PASS THIS DEAL WITH NO
AMENDMENTS, MAKE IT MUCH HARDER
TO BE ABLE TO SLOW DOWN THIS
DEAL OR BLOCK THIS DEAL.
>> Woodruff: WELL, I UPON YOU
HEARD-- PERHAPS YOU DEPARTMENT--
BUT WHAT SENATOR HATCH WAS JUST
POINTING OUT IS THAT THERE'S
SOME CONFUSION.
SOME PEOPLE MAY NOT UNDERSTAND
WHAT'S GOING ON.
THE TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY
WILL GIVE THE CONGRESS THE
ABILITY, AN EVEN GREATER
ABILITY, TO LOOK AT WHAT'S IN
THIS LEGISLATION.
AND THAT ONCE THE TRANS-PACIFIC
PARTNERSHIP LANGUAGE IS
AVAILABLE, THAT IT WILL BE OUT
IN THE PUBLIC FOR DEBATE.
>> WELL, THAT'S LIKE SAYING ONCE
WE MAKE IT PUBLIC WE'LL MAKE IT
PUBLIC.
THE POINT IS, THE FIRST VOTE IS
GOING TO BE TO GREASE SKIDS SO
THAT IT WILL PASS WHOW ONLY 51
VOTE.
AND IT CAN'T BE ANY AMENDMENTS
TO IT.
THE TRADE AGREEMENT THAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT, THE FIRST ONE UP,
THE TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP,
IS LARGELY ALREADY NEGOTIATED.
AND THE PRESIDENT COULD MAKE IT
PUBLIC.
IN FACT, I WANT TO MAKE CLEAR--
PRESIDENT BUSH, WHEN HE
NEGOTIATED A TRADE AGREEMENT, HE
POSTED IT MONTHS IN ADVANCE OF
ASKING CONGRESS TO GIVE HIM EVEN
PARTIAL TRADE PROMOTION
AUTHORITY TO MOVE THIS THING
THROUGH QUICKLY.
BUT I WANT TO MAKE ONE OTHER
POINT BECAUSE I THINK IT'S
REALLY IMPORTANT.
AND THAT IS THIS TRADE PROMOTION
AUTHORITY ABOUT A WHOLE LOT MORE
THAN JUST THE FIRST DEAL THAT'S
LINED UP, THE ONE FOR THE
PACIFIC SIDE.
IT IS A SIX-YEAR GREASING OF THE
SKIDS.
IN OTHER WORDS, THE NEXT
PRESIDENT AND POTENTIALLY THE
ONE AFTER THAT WILL HAVE THE
SAME ABILITY TO RAM THROUGH
TRADE DEALS, AND SO WHEN
PRESIDENT P PRESIDENPRESIDENT OR
EXAMPLE, HE REFUSED TO WORK A
TRADE DEAL THAT WOULD WEAKEN
FINANCIAL REGULATIONS, HE CAN'T
BIND THE NEXT PRESIDENT.
AND RIGHT NOW, THERE'S A LOT OF
PRESSURE ON THE NEXT DEAL THAT'S
COMING UP WITH THE EUROPEANS.
WE'VE HEARD EUROPEAN OFFICIALS,
WE'VE HEARD THE REPUBLICANS,
WE'VE HEARD BIG FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS ON BOTH SIDES OF
THE ATLANTIC WHO HAVE ALL PUSHED
TO TRY TO WEAKEN FINANCIAL
REGULATIONS.
IF TRADE AUTHORITY PASSES IT
WILL MAKE IT A LOT EASIER TO DO
THAT IN THE NEXT TRADE DEAL.
>> Woodruff: MY UNDERSTANDING
IS THE ADMINISTRATION PUSHED
BACK ON THAT, THAT THOSE BATTLES
HAVE TO BE FOUGHT AS THEY COME
ALONG.
>> BUT YOU HAVE TO REMEMBER WHAT
THE DIFFERENCE IS IN THE VOTE.
IF THE REPUBLICANS WANT TO DO A
DIRECT ATTACK ON DODD-FRANK,
THEY GOTTA GET 60 VOTES TO DO
IT.
BUT IF THEY WANT TO BE ABE TO DO
IT THROUGH TRADE, THEN THEY CAN
DO IT IF THIS FAST TRACK PASSES,
THEY CAN DO IT WITH 51 VOTES.
AND ANYONE WHO'S LOOK AROUND
WASHINGTON OVER THE PAST FEW
YEARS, UNDERSTANDS THERE IS A
BIG DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HAVING TO
GET TO 51 VOTES AND HAVING TO
GET TO 60 VOTES.
>> Woodruff: VERY QUICKLY,
SENATOR WARREN, A LOT BEING
WRITTEN LATELY ABOUT WHETHER
THERE'S SOME PERSONAL ANIMOSITY
BETWEEN YOU AND PRESIDENT OBAMA
OVER THIS.
HE'S BEEN PRETTY VOCAL.
YOU'VE BEEN PRETTY VOCAL.
HE MADE THE COMMENT THE OTHER
DAY TO THE EFFECT YOU'RE A
POLITICIAN, TOO, LIKE EVERYBODY
ELSE, AND YOU'RE JUST WRONG ON
THIS.
IS THERE SOMETHING PERSONAL
GOING ON?
>> THERE'S NOTHING PERSONAL FOR
ME.
THIS.
UN, THIS IS MY LIFE'S WORK.
I HAVE SPENT REALLY ALL MY ADULT
LIFE WORKING ON WHAT'S HAPPENING
TO AMERICA'S MIDDLE CLASS.
AND I AM DEEPLY, DEEPLY WORRIED
THAT ANOTHER TRADE AGREEMENT
WILL BE ANOTHER PUNCH IN THE GUT
TO HARDWORKING FAMILIES.
>> Woodruff: SENATOR ELIZABETH
WARREN, WE THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: LET'S GET MORE ON
THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE
DEADLY AMTRAK DERAILMENT, AND
ITS POTENTIAL CAUSE.
HARI SREENIVASAN PICKS UP THAT
PART OF THE STORY.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE HEARD
EARLIER, INVESTIGATORS ANNOUNCED
A STUNNING FINDING: BEFORE THE
ENGINEER TIRED BRAKING THE
TRAIN, IT WAS GOING MORE THAN
100 MILES AN HOUR.
THAT'S MORE THAN TWICE THE SPEED
LIMIT FOR THAT PART OF THE RAIL.
ROBERT SUMWALT IS LEADING THE
INVESTIGATION FOR THE NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD.
HE JOINS ME FROM THE SCENE OF
THE ACCIDENT.
SO, FIRST, I WANT TO ASK YOU
KIND OF YOUR REACTION TO THAT
FACT.
MOST PEOPLE IN THE THE TV
AUDIENCE ARE GOING TO SAY,
THAT'S YET TRAIN DERAILED.
IT WAS GOING TOO FAST.
>> WELL,ERT CAINLY, WE WANT TO
FIND OUT WHY THE TRAIN WAS GOING
OVER TWICE THE SPEED LIMIT.
WE WANT TO FIEND THAT OUT.
AND THEN ANOTHER FACTOR IS WHY
DID THE TRAIN DERAIL?
AND YOU'RE RIGHT, IT PROBABLY
HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH THE
SPEED.
SO WE WANT TO UNDERSTAND THE
CRASH DYNAMICS.
WE WANT TO UNDERSTAND WHY THE
TRAIN WAS GOING THAT FAST.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU AND YOUR
AGENCY HAVE INVESTIGATED SEVERAL
DIFFERENT TYPES OF ACCIDENTS
BEFORE.
WHAT ARE SOME OF THE RANS THAT
MAKE A TRAIN GET TO THAT SPEED,
ESPECIALLY HEADING INTO A CURVE?
>> WELL, I THINK ONE THING THAT
WILL BE KEY TO THE INVESTIGATION
IS BEING ABLE TO INTERVIEW THE
ENGINEER.
WE WANT TO FIND OUT WHAT HIS
THOUGHTS WERE, WHAT WAS GOING
THROUGH HIS MIND.
WE WANT TO CHECK THE-- VERY
CAREFULLY, WE WANT TO CHECK THE
MECHANICAL CONDITION OF THE
TRAIN.
WE WANT TO CHECK THE TRAIN'S
SIGNAL SYSTEM TO SEE WHAT IT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN INDICATING.
SO WE'RE TAKING A HOLISTIC
APPROACH.
WE WANT TO LOOK AT EVERYTHING
AND TRY TO UNDERSTAND JUST THE
VERY QUESTION YOU ASKED-- WHY
WAS THE TRAIN GOING THAT SPEED?
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS YOU MENTIONED EARLIER
THIS YOUR PRESS CONFERENCE THIS
AFTERNOON WAS SOMETHING CALLED
"POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL."
MOST PEOPLE IN OUR VIEWING
AUDIENCE DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT
IS.
WHAT IS IT?
HOW DOES IT WORK?
AND WHY WASN'T IT IN THIS
SPECIFIC SECTION OF TRACK?
>> WELL, POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL
IS A DEVICE THAT WILL BASICALLY
KNOWS WHAT THE SPEED LIMIT IS
FOR THE TRACK THROUGH G.P.S.,
AND IT-- IF THE TRAIN IS
EXCEEDING THAT SPEED, IT WILL
ACTUALLY BRING THE TRAIN TO A
STOP.
IT WILL ALSO PROTECT AGAINST
TRAINS RUN THRIEWG RED SIGNALS
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
WE-- AMTRAK HAS A SYSTEM THAT
THEY CALL ASIS, WHICH IS
BASICALLY A POSITIVE TRAIN
CONTROL SYSTEM.
THEY'VE GOT IT ACEIS INSTALLED
THROUGHOUT MUCH OF THE NORTHEAST
CORRIDOR.
HOWEVER, UNFORTUNATELY, IT WAS
NOT INSTALLED IN THIS PARTICULAR
SECTION OF THE TRACK.
WE WANT TO FIND OUT WHY WAS IT
NOT HERE?
>> Sreenivasan: SO AMTRAK HAS
OTHER SYSTEMS IN PLACE AS WELL.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO BE ABLE TO
LEARN FROM THOSE?
I'M SORRY, THERE WAS A TRUCK
GOING BY RIGHT WHEN YOU ASKED
THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: I SAID AMTRAK
HAS OTHER SYSTEMS IN PLACE AS
WELL FOR SAFETY.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO BE ABLE TO
LEARN FROM THOSE WHEN YOU KEEP
DIGGING?
>> WHAT ARE WE GOING TO BE ABLE
TO LEARN FMRO AMTRAK'S OTHER
SYSTEMS?
>> Sreenivasan: YES.
>> I'M SORRY, I'M HAVING TROUBLE
HEARING AND UNDERSTANDING.
MAYBE YOU COULD REPHRASE THE
QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: IF THIS
PARTICULAR SET OF TRACTION
DIDN'T HAVE THE POSITIVE TRAIN
CONTROL.
YOU SAID AMTRAK HAS OTHER
SYSTEMS IN PLACE ON ITS TRAINS.
IS THERE ANY INDICATION ANY OF
THOSE SYSTEMS FAILED AS WELL?
>> WELL, WHEN I TALK ABOUT
POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL FOR
AMTRAK, THAT IS A SYEMST CALLED
ASIS.
SO WE WANT T OUT WHY THEIR
STHE ASIS SYSTEM, WAS NOT
INSTALLED IN THIS PARTICULAR
SECTION OF THE TRACK.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID-- YOU
BASICALLY GOT HERE AFTER THE
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS GOT OUT OF
THEIR WAY AT ABOUT 2:00 IN THE
AFTERNOON.
YOU JUST GOT HERE TODAY.
IF WE HAVE THIS CONVERSATION
AGAIN TOMORROW, WHAT ARE YOU
GOING TO BE ABLE TO TELL US THAT
YOU DON'T KNOW TODAY?
>> I THINK WILL BE A BIG DAY FOR
US.
I MEAN, TODAY, YOU'RE RIGHT, WE
HAD INVESTIGATORS ARRIVING ON
THE SCENE BETWEEN 4:00 AND 5:00
THIS MORNING.
THE REST OF OUR TEAM PRETTY MUCH
GOT HERE BY 9:00 OR 9:30.
BUT WE HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO GET
UP AND REALLY DO EXTREMELY
DETAILED MEASUREMENTS OF THE
TRACK, THE CARS, THE TRAIN CARS.
WE'VE NOT BEEN ABLE TO DO THAT
BECAUSE THE RECOVERY EFFORT'S
BEEN GOING ON.
BUT WE-- WE WILL BEGIN GETTING
IN THERE DOING A VERY DETAILED
SURVEY OF THE SITE.
WE'LL BE LOOKING AT THE
MECHANICAL CONDITION OF THE
LOCOMOTIVE, OF THE REST OF THE
TRAIN.
WE WILL START COLLECTING RECORDS
OR CONTINUE COLLECTING RECORDS.
WE'VE GOT A LOT TO DO FOR THE
NEXT FEW DAYS.
I THINK, THOUGH, FOR THE FIRST
DAY, WE'VE GOTTEN A LOT DONE,
BUT I THINK TOMORROW WE'LL HAVE
A LOT MORE DISPLOOR SO WHAT'S
THAT EVENT RECORD ETHE BLACK BOX
OF THE TRAIN, BE ABLE TO TELL
YOU?
YOU'VE TAKEN IT TO WASHINGTON
NOW.
YOU'RE GOING TO GET ALL OF THE
INFORMATION OVER THE NEXT 24-36
HOURS.
WHAT IS THAT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
TELL YOU? ALSO, YOU'RE PROBABLY
GOING TO HAVE VIDEO PICTURES OF
THE CAMERA THAT WAS POINTING OUT
IN FRONT OF THE TRAIN, RIGHT?
>> YES, WE DO, AS YOU MENTIONED,
THE FORWARD-FACING VIDEO.
WE'LL TAKE THAT TO WASHINGTON
AND BEGIN EXAMINING THAT,
CONDUCTING ANALYSIS OF THAT.
THE EVENT DATA RECORDERS CAN
TELL US A LOT, AND IT'S NOT JUST
A MATTER OF PRESSING A BUTTON
AND SAYING, "TELL US
EVERYTHING."
THEY HAVE T TO GO THROUGH A
COMPLEX ALGORITHM ALGORITHMS TOR
THESE DATA.
THAT'S WHY WE DON'T HAVE EVER
PIECE OF INFORMATION WE'D LIKE
TO TELL YOU.
WE WERE VERY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
SPEED AND THAT'S WHY WE WERE
ABLE TO GET THE SPEED SO EARLY.
THIS INVESTIGATION GL ON FOR
QUITE SOME TIME.
IT WILL BE VERY COMPLEX.
BUT I'M VERY CONFIDENT AT THE
END OF THE INVESTIGATION, WE
WILL BE ABLE TO DETERMINE NOT
ONLY WHAT HAPPENED BUT WHY IT
HAPPENED SO WE CAN KEEP IT FROM
HAPPENING AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ROBERT SUMWALT, FROM THE
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
BOARD, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Woodruff: NOW ANOTHER
INSTALLMENT IN OUR SERIES,
"TRANSGENDER IN AMERICA."
CHILDREN AS YOUNG AS THREE ARE
BEGINNING TO UNDERSTAND THEIR
GENDER IDENTITY AS SOMETHING
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT THEY WERE
ASSUMED TO BE AT BIRTH.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JACKIE JUDD HAS OUR STORY OF
DOCTORS AND FAMILIES LIVING
THROUGH THESE DISCOVERIES.
>> Reporter: EIGHT-YEAR-OLD
SKYLER KELLY IS HOPING FOR A
CAREER IN THE MAJOR LEAGUES AND
ENJOYS THE PRIVILEGES OF BEING
BIG BROTHER TO FOUR-YEAR-OLD
LUKE.
IT IS NOT HOW LIFE STARTED FOR
SKYLER.
>> I CAN TOTALLY SEE SITTING ON
THE HOSPITAL BED AND DAYS OF A
LONG LABOR AND SOMEONE SAYING,
"OH, WHAT A SWEET LITTLE GIRL."
>> Reporter: AT A REMARKABLY
EARLY AGE, SKYLER, WHO LIVES IN
SEATTLE, BEGAN TO LET HIS
PARENTS KNOW WHAT HE LOOKED LIKE
ON THE OUTSIDE-- A GIRL-- IS NOT
HOW HE FELT ON THE INSIDE.
>> WHEN PEOPLE TRIED TO BRUSH MY
HAIR I WOULD TRY TO PUSH THE
BRUSH AWAY AND I'D CRY AND
SCREAM AND IT WAS HARD IN THE
MORNINGS TO EVEN GET READY.
>> Reporter: DID YOU ALSO HAVE A
FIGHT OVER CLOTHING, WHAT TO
WEAR, WHAT KIND OF CLOTHES TO
WEAR?
>> WELL, I WAS PRETTY MUCH
ALLOWED TO WEAR WHAT I WANTED
EXCEPT ON SCHOOL PICTURES I HAD
TO WEAR A DRESS AND I HATED IT.
>> Reporter: SO DID YOU EVER
SMILE IN THOSE SCHOOL PICTURES?
>> I SMILED BUT -BUT INSIDE?
I DID NOT LIKE IT INSIDE.
>> Reporter: THE "WHY" OF
SKYLER'S GENDER IDENTITY ISN'T
FULLY UNDERSTOOD.
THE LONG-HELD AND NOW
CONTROVERSIAL MEDICAL VIEW LINKS
BEING TRANSGENDER TO A MENTAL
DISORDER OR EMOTIONAL DISTRESS.
HOWEVER, NEW SCIENCE IS EMERGING
POINTING TO A COMPLEX SET OF
FACTORS.
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTONA
OLSON INVESTIGATES THE ORIGINS
OF BEING TRANSGENDER.
>> YOUR BIOLOGY DETERMINES A LOT
OF YOUR PSYCHOLOGY, AND I THINK
THAT'S KIND OF WHERE THE FEELING
IS RIGHT NOW, THAT THERE ARE
PROBABLY BIOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTORS
THAT MAKE A BIG CONTRIBUTION
TOWARDS OUR SENSE OF GENDER
IDENTITY, WHICH IS
PSYCHOLOGICALLY HOW WE FEEL.
ARE WE MALE OR FEMALE OR
SOMETHING ELSE IN BETWEEN?
NEITHER?
>> Reporter: ENDOCRINOLOGIST
JOSHUA SAFER AT BOSTON
UNIVERSITY TREATS HUNDREDS OF
ADULT TRANSGENDER PATIENTS AND
IS A LEADER IN THE FIELD.
HE FIRMLY BELIEVES GENDER
IDENTITY IS HARD-WIRED IN ALL OF
US.
>> IN MOST PEOPLE, CHROMOSOMES,
BODY PARTS, GENDER IDENTITY
ALIGN, SO SOMEBODY WITH A MALE
CHROMOSOME, SOMEBODY WITH MALE
BODY PARTS IS GOING TO HAVE MALE
GENDER IDENTITY.
THAT IS THE USUAL CIRCUMSTANCE.
ALL OF THESE ARE INDEPENDENTLY
CONTROLLED BIOLOGICALLY, AND
THEREFORE IT IS NO SURPRISE THAT
IN A GIVEN SUBSET OF THE
POPULATION, ONE PART IS NOT
ALIGNED, THAT WHATEVER GENES ARE
CONTROLLING THAT HAPPEN TO BE
DIFFERENT FOR THAT INDIVIDUAL,
AND THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH
TRANSGENDER INDIVIDUALS.
>> Reporter: DR. SAFER CONDUCTED
THE MOST EXTENSIVE REVIEW TO
DATE OF EXISTING STUDIES TYING
GENDER IDENTITY TO BIOLOGICAL
FACTORS.
THE MOST PERSUASIVE EVIDENCE HE
FOUND WAS IN EXPERIMENTS DONE
OVER THE PAST HALF CENTURY ON
PEOPLE BORN WITH THE MALE XY
CHROMOSOMES BUT WITH THE RARE
CONDITION OF AMBIGUOUS
GENITALIA.
SOON AFTER BIRTH, THEY WERE
SURGICALLY GIVEN FEMALE
GENITALIA, THEN RAISED AS GIRLS.
>> THESE KIDS WERE DRESSED IN
PINK AND GIVEN DRESSES AND DOLLS
AND GIVEN ESTROGEN WHEN THEY HIT
PUBERTY SO THEY HAD APPROPRIATE
BREAST DEVELOPMENT AND SUCH.
AND SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A
PRETTY EXTREME APPROACH THAT, IF
ANY APPROACH WAS GOING TO WORK,
IT SHOULD HAVE WORKED.
BUT WHAT HAPPENED INSTEAD IS THE
MAJORITY OF THESE KIDS, IF YOU
QUERY, SAY THAT THEY HAVE MALE
GENDER IDENTITY DESPITE THAT
VERY, VERY EXTREME PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: THE CONCLUSION,
ACCORDING TO DR. SAFER, IS THAT
GENDER IDENTITY CANNOT BE
MANIPULATED OR TAUGHT.
A SECOND SET OF DATA HE REVIEWED
INVOLVED THE ANATOMY OF THE
BRAIN.
POST-MORTEM TESTING OF WOMEN,
AND MALES-AT-BIRTH WHO
TRANSITIONED TO FEMALES, FOUND
CERTAIN REGIONS TO BE STRIKINGLY
SIMILAR; THOUGH DR. SAFER SAYS
MORE RESEARCH IS NEEDED TO
DETERMINE IF THOSE REGIONS ARE
LINKED TO GENDER IDENTITY.
AT THIS LAB AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
WASHINGTON IN SEATTLE, A UNIQUE
LONG TERM STUDY IS UNDERWAY OF
TRANSGENDER CHILDREN-- CHILDREN
AS YOUNG AS THE AGE OF THREE.
WITH THE SUPPORT OF THEIR
FAMILIES, THEY HAVE TRANSITIONED
FROM THE GENDER OF THEIR BIRTH
TO WHAT IS CALLED THEIR
"EXPRESSED" GENDER.
SKYLER, ALONG WITH SEVERAL DOZEN
OTHER KIDS-- BOTH TRANSGENDER
AND NOT-- WENT THROUGH A BATTERY
OF TESTS IN THE FIRST PHASE OF
THE STUDY TO PINPOINT HOW THEY
SEE THEMSELVES.
THIS VERY QUICK PICTURE AND WORD
ASSOCIATION-CALLED I.A.T., OR
IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION TEST, IS
INTENDED TO TAKE A TRUE MEASURE
OF THE STRENGTH OF A CHILD'S
IDENTITY.
>> IF THERE IS A KID WHO AT
BIRTH THE DOCTOR SAID THIS KID
IS A GIRL BUT LATER CAME TO
IDENTIFY AS A BOY AND THAT KID
IS LIVING AS A BOY TODAY, THAT
KID WILL SHOW THE SAME RESULTS
ON THE I.A.T. AS ANY OTHER BOY
AND LOOKS NOTHING LIKE SAY HIS
SISTER OR ANOTHER RANDOM GIRL
THAT WE JUST PULLED OFF THE
STREET.
>> Reporter: DR OLSON LEADS THE
RESEARCH TEAM.
>> SO, THIS SUGGESTS THAT THIS
ISN'T JUST A THING A KID IS
SAYING OR PRETENDING TO BE, THIS
DOESN'T SEEM TO BE A KID BEING
PLAYFUL OR BEING ORNERY, THIS IS
REALLY TRULY HOW THE CHILD SEEMS
TO IDENTIFY THEMSELVES AT THIS
AGE.
>> Reporter: DR. OLSON'S
RESEARCH CUTS TO THE CORE OF THE
DILEMMA PARENTS OF TRANSGENDER
CHILDREN FACE; HOW TO KNOW IF
THIS IS REAL.
>> I GUESS MY CONCERNS AS IT
EVOLVED AND WE WERE NOT AT THIS
STAGE OF HIM BEING AN AFFIRMED
MALE, MY CONCERNS WERE ARE WE
JUMPING THE GUN.
I JUST WASN'T COMFORTABLE WITH
THAT WHOLE THING.
>> Reporter: MANY PEOPLE
STRUGGLE WITH THE SAME THING AND
BELIEVE TRANSGENDER CHILDREN ARE
JUST GOING THROUGH A PHASE.
DR. OLSON SAYS IN TWO YEARS OF
FOLLOWING THE SAME GROUP OF
YOUNGSTERS, NONE HAS "REVERTED"
TO THEIR GENDER AT BIRTH.
STILL, SHE ENCOUNTERS DEEP
SKEPTICISM.
>> WE SEE A LOT OF PELE SOPAYING
THINGS LIKE, YOU KNOW, MY CHILD
THOUGHT THAT THEY WERE A
DINOSAUR WHEN THEY WERE FOUR,
BUT I DIDN'T LET THEM LIVE AS A
DINOSAUR, AND THEY DIDN'T REALLY
THINK THEY WERE A DINOSAUR.
THESE KIDS ARE SAYING THIS IS
WHO I AM: I AM A GIRL, OR I AM A
BOY.
>> Reporter: THE KELLY'S CAME TO
CERTAINTY ONE NIGHT WHEN SKYLER
WAS ABOUT SIX AND THERE WAS NO
DENYING WHAT THEIR CHILD WAS
TRYING TO TELL THEM.
>> AND I REMEMBER, GOD, THIS ONE
AWFUL NIGHT, I CAN STILL PICTURE
US UPSTAIRS AND SKYLER WAS JUST
HAVING LIKE A MELTDOWN OVER
NOTHING, BUT JUST A
HEARTBREAKING MELTDOWN, LIKE THE
KIND YOU CAN TELL THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A TANTRUM AND AN I AM
JUST SO EMOTIONALLY UNHAPPY, AND
JOSH AND I BOTH JUST FINALLY
SAYING, LIKE, WHAT IS IT, IS
THERE SOMETHING THAT YOU'RE NOT
TELLI US,NG AND I SAID DO YOU
WANT TO WHISPER IT TO US, AND HE
WHISPERED AND SAID I WANT TO
START WEARING BOY'S UNDERWEAR.
>> Reporter: AND THAT IS WHEN
SKYLER TRANSITIONED, ENTERING
FIRST GRADE AS THE PERSON HE
KNEW HIMSELF TO BE.
DR. OLSON NOW HAS CLOSE TO A
HUNDRED TRANSGENDER CHILDREN IN
THE STUDY AND HOPES TO FOLLOW
THEM INTO ADOLESCENCE AND
ADULTHOOD.
AND THAT BY LEARNING MORE, THE
TOO-COMMON TRAJECTORY OF A
TRANSGENDER PERSON'S LIFE CAN BE
CHANGED.
>> WE ALL LOOK AT THE NEWS AND
WE SEE THOSE TERRIBLE STATISTICS
ABOUT WHAT LIFE IS LIKE FOR
TRANSGENDER ADULTS.
41% OF TRANSGENDER ADULTS
ATTEMPT SUICIDE, THEY HAVE
EXTREMELY HIGH RATES OF
UNEMPLOYMENT AND DISCRIMINATION,
VIOLENCE, AND WHAT I WANT TO
KNOW IS HOW DO WE CHANGE THAT?
IS THERE A DECISION THAT COULD
BE MADE IN A CHILD'S LIFE, AND
INSTEAD PUT THEM ON A PATH
THAT'S MORE LIKE THE OTHERIDS K
THAT THEY GO TO SCHOOL WITH AND
ARE IN THEIR FAMILIES WHERE THEY
HAVE JUST AS A GOOD A CHANCE AS
ANYONE ELSE.
>> Reporter: OF ALL THESE WORDS,
WHICH WORDS WOULD YOU CHOOSE TO
DESCRIBE YOURSELF?
HAPPY, ANGRY, PROUD, SAD?
WHICH WORDS?
>> HAPPY, PROUD.
>> Reporter: WHY HAPPY, PROUD?
>> BECAUSE I'M HAPPY NOW THAT I
GET TO LIVE HOW I WANT AND I'M--
WELL, I'M PROUD BECAUSE MY
PARENTS UNDERSTOOD IT AND
THEY'RE GREAT.
>> HE'S SUPER WELL ADJUSTED.
HE'S VERY HAPPY.
>> HE'S BRAVER THAN I'VE EVER
FELT AND I HOPE HE CAN KEEP THAT
AND THE WORLD DOESN'T BREAK HIM
OF THAT.
>> Reporter: THE KELLY'S SAY THE
EMERGING SCIENCE OF GENDER
IDENTITY IS LESS IMPORTANT TO
THEM THAN THEIR CHILD FINDING
ACCEPTANCE AND SUPPORT.
THEY KNOW IT MAY NOT BE AN EASY
LIFE FOR SKYLER, BUT IT WILL BE
AN AUTHENTIC ONE.
FOR THPBS E NEWSHOUR, THIS IS
JACKIE JUDD IN SEATTLE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
NEW AND UNCONVENTIONAL WORK OF
POETRY, FROM ONE OF OUR OWN.
GWEN HAS OUR LATEST CONVERSATION
FOR THE "NEWSHOUR BOOKSHELF."
>> Ifill:
>> Ifill: IT TURNS OUT JEFG
WRITES POETRY AND HIS FIRST
COLLECTION IS OUT.
APTLIES IS CALLED "THE NEWS:
POETRY" AND JEFFREY JOINS ME
NOW.
>> ODDLY ENOUGH SITTING ON THIS
SIDE OF THE TABLE.
>> Ifill: PEOPLE THINK OF YOU
AS A HARD-BITTEN NEWSMAN, NOT A
PERSON WHO SEES THE WORLD THIS
WAY.
WHY DID YOU DECIDE TO DO IT?
>> Announcer: I AM A
HARD-BITTEN NEWS GUY.
BUT THERE'S A SIDE OF ME THAT
LOVES LITERATURE, POETRY, LOVES
MUSIC-- IT COMES OUT ON THE
PROGRAM AS WELL.
I STARTED WRITING A LONG TIME
AGO.
I WROTE AT DIFFERENT TIMES
DURING MY LIFE.
I WOULD PICK UP SNIPPETS FROM
ALONG THE WAY.
I STARTED REALIZING THAT I
WANTED TO GO BACK AND LOOK AT
STORIES THEY HAD DONE AND SORT
OF RETHINK THEM, REIMAGINE THEM,
TELL THEM IN A DIFFERENT VOICE
WITH DIFFERENT WORDS.
AND IT WAS JUST-- IT WAS-- IT
WAS FUN FOR ME.
IT WAS INTERESTING TO DO.
>> Ifill: WERE YOU THINKING OF
THESE STORIES THROUGH A POET'S
EYE AT THE TIME OR WAS IT
LOOKING BACK AT IT?
>> Announcer: IT WAS LOOKING
BACK.
WHEN I'M DOING IT, I'M DOING IT
THE WAY YOU AND-- WE'RE
NEWSPEOPLE, RIGHT.
I WOULD SOMETIMES HEAR THINGS
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WAS
MOST INTERESTING FOR ME WRITING
THE POEMS WAS A MEMORY OF
SOMETHING THAT HAD HAPPENED,
THAT HIT ME AT THE TIME, SORE
THAT STAYED WITH ME, YOU KNOW,
THAT STAYED THERE.
I MIGHT HAVE WRITTEN DOWN THE
PHRASE.
IN SOME CASESY WENT BACK AND
LOOKED AT THE TRANSCRIPTS.
I WENT ONLINE AND LOOKED AT THE
TRANSCRIPTES OF OLD STORIES I
HAD DONE BECAUSE IT WAS PARTLY
THERE, AND I WANTED TO FIND THAT
VOICE AGAIN.
>> Ifill: WHEN YOU DID THAT,
DID YOU DISCOVER RICHARD AVADON
WAS RIGHT WHEN HE TOLD YOU THE
CAMERA ALWAYS LIES.
>> IT'S NOT SO MUCH THAT IT
LIES.
I USED THAT QUOTE, AND QUOTES
THAT RICHARD AVADON SAID TO ME--
>> Ifill: THE PHOTOGRAPHER.
>> WE DID AN INTERVIEW IN THE
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM SURROUNDED
BY HIS GRAND PORTRAITS, AND WE
WERE TALKING.
THIS SUBJECT FASCINATES HIM.
WHAT DOES THE CAMERA TELL YOU?
IS ITT TELLS YOU A TRUTH BUT NOT
THE TRUTH.
>> Ifill: I WAN I AM GOING TO AK
YOU TO READ SOME OF YOUR
WRITINGS.
ONE IS FROM HAITI.
YOU WENT TO THERE AFTER THE
EARTHQUAKE.
>> I WENT TO A SMALL VILLAGE
WHERE PEOPLE WERE DYING IN THE
CENTRAL PLATEAU.
THIS IS CALLED "HAITI."
AND IT GIPS AND ENDS WITH ACTUAL
QUOTES FROM THAT TRIP.
EPIDEMIOLOGICALLY, THIS AREA IS
TERRIFYING.
LAS SALINE, ON A SUN-SOAKED,
TRASH-SOAKED MORNING AS THE
CHILDREN FILL THEIR BUCKETS FROM
A MAKESHIFT WELL.
THE PIGS SCAVENGED WHILE A RAT
WATCHED ALL.
WHY BOTHER TO HIDE.
LAS SALINE, SOMEWHERE NEARBY THE
SALTED ASSAULTED SEA.
DAYS LATER, THE LAST LIGHT HIGH
IN THE CENTRAL PLATEAU, SO FAR,
SO BONE CRUSHED BY THE ROAD, I'D
ARGUED AGAINST GOING.
THEY FILLED THE BENCHES AND TOLD
US OF DEATH UPON DEATH.
A MAN WHO'D LOST HIS SON SAID,
"I AM A BIRD LEFT WITHOUT A
BRANCH TO LAND ON."
>> Ifill: THAT'S BEAUTIFUL.
>> Announcer: I REMEMBER THAT.
IT WAS ONE OF THE SADDEST THINS
I'D EVER HEARD IN MY LIFE WHEN
HE SAID THAT.
>> Ifill: THERE'S A POEM YOU
WROTE THAT TAKES US YOU BEHIND
THE CURTAIN OF WHAT WE DO.
IT GIVES IT A LITTLE AWAY.
ESPECIALLY WHEN THINGS DON'T GO
AS PLANNED.
>> Announcer: A LOT ON MY
MEEND WAS ABOUT WHAT WE DO HERE
EVERY NIGHT.
IT'S AN INTERESTING TRANSACTION.
THERE'S SOMEBODY IN OUR EAR,
DIRECTOR TALKING, AND THERE'S
THE COMMUNICATION, AND WE KNOW
THERE ARE PEOPLE OUT THERE
WATCHING SO THERE'S A LOT GOING
ON.
THIS IS A LITTLE BIT OF THE POEM
CALLED, "THE ART OF THE
INTERVIEW."
IT BEGINS, "ENGAGED, OPEN,
CIEWRKS FIRM, PREPARED BY ALL
THAT'S COME BEFORE, NO SURPRISES
BUT READY TO BE SURPRISED
AGAIN."
IT GOES ON FROM THERE ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENS IN AN INTERVIEW.
BUT THEN THERE'S THIS THING
THAT'S HAPPENED TO BOTH OF US,
RIGHT?
"ONCE A MAN FROZE UNABLE TO
SPEAK.
I ASKED AND ANSWERED EVERY
QUESTION MYSELF THEN SAID, "YOU
AGREE?"
WE COULD HAVE GONE ON THAT WAY
FOREVER.
ANOTHER NIGHT, THE LIGHTS WENT
OUT.
WE UNDERSTOOD WE WERE STILL,
AGAIN, ALWAYS IN THE DARK."
YOU'RE LAUGHING BECAUSE IT'S
HAPPENED TO YOU.
>> Ifill: IT HAS HAPPENED TO
ME.
>> Announcer: SOMEBODY
FREEZES.
AND WHAT HAPPENS THIS THAT
MOMENT?
AND THE THE NIGHTS THE LIGHTS
WENT OUT, I WAS SITTING OVER
THERE WITH MARK AND DAVID DOING
THE FRIDAYS POLITICS, POWER WENT
OUT.
>> Ifill: THAT'S RIGHT, AND
YOU HAD TO KEEP TALKING.
>> Announcer: KEEP TALKING.
>> Ifill: OKAY, ONE MORE.
THIS IS KIND OF PERSONAL BECAUSE
IT THIS ALSO TAKES US A LITTLE
BIT INSIDE YOUR LIFE.
AND YOU WROTE A BOOK ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED-- A POPE ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED AFTER THE PASSING OF
YOUR FATHER.
>> Brown: SOME OF THE POEMS IN
HERE ARE MORE PERSONAL, AND THIS
IS ONE THAT, YOU KNOW, EVERYBODY
DEALS WITH DEATH OF A LOVED ONE.
AND A LOT OF STRANGE THINGS
HAPPEN AT A MOMENT LIKE THAT,
STRANGE THOUGHTS.
THIS IS ON THE DAY OF MY
FATHER'S FUNERAL WHICH WAS A
YEAR AGO.
IT'S CALLED, "SUCCESSION."
ONE MORNING STATE POLICE ESCORT
US TO YOUR DPRAIF.
THE NEXT, MY FLIGHTS FLIGHTIS
CANCELED.
MAINTENANCE ISSUES BREAKING OUT
ALL OVER.
YOU WOULD SPEAK OF AGRAND
THEORY, SOMETHING TYING ALL THIS
TOGETHER.
BUT YOU HAD NONE YOURSELF, NONE
THAT REACHED ME THEN OR NOW AS I
DRIVE YOUR CAR SLOWLY INTO THE
TRANQUIL STREETS OF MY YOUTH.
HERE IS WHERE I LEARNED TO RIDE
A BIKE, ON THIS HIGH HILL THAT
IS NO HILL AT ALL, AND STILL I
FELL.
AND NOW YOU DESCEND AND STILL I
FALL.
AND HERE IS WHERE I LEARNED TO
DOUBT, IN THE CHAPEL WHERE WE
DONNED BLACK SKULLCAPS THAT
MEANT NOTHING, I TELL YOU.
IF GOD SPEAKS, IT IS ELSEWHERE.
AND HERE OUR MY OWN CHILDREN
ROOTED AND UNCERTAIN, WATCHING
ME SPEAK TO YOU.
YOU WATCHED THE NEWS EVERY
NIGHT, WORRIED IF I DID NOT MAKE
AIR, TRAVELING, SICK, USELESS,
LOST.
NOW THAT YOU ARE GONE, TRAFFIC
PARTED BY THE STATE POLICE, CAN,
I, TOO, DISAPPEAR?"
IT'S A HARD ONE TO READ EVEN
SITTING HERE BECAUSE MY FATHER
WOULD HAVE WATCHED US EVERY
NIGHT, AND IF I WASN'T THERE FOR
A FEW DAYS, HE'D WONDER WHAT
HAPPENED, YOU KNOW.
WHERE ARE YOU?
AND I'D HAVE TO EXPLAIN.
>> Ifill: AND THE LOSS OF A
PARENT IS A UNIVERSAL EXPERIENCE
EVENTUALLY.
I WANT TO ASK YOU ONE MORE
QUESTION.
AS YOU PUT THIS BOOK TOGETHER,
AND AS YOU JUST GO THROUGH YOUR
LIFE AS A WRITER, A POET, A
TELEVISION PERSONALITY, DO YOU
FEEL THAT YOU'RE CONSTANTLY
LOOKING AT THE WORLD THROUGH
MULTIPLE LENSES?
>> Brown: I DO, I DO, AND I
LIKE THAT.
I LIKE THAT SO MUCH.
I THINK THAT'S WHAT THE WORLD IS
ABOUT.
I LOVE WHAT WE DO.
YOU KNOW, LOOKING AT THE WORLD
THROUGH FACTS AND WE ARE SO
CAREFUL EVERY NIGHT TO TRY TO
GET IT RIGHT.
BUT I THINK THE WORLD IS FILLED
WITH ALL KIND OF OTHER THINGS,
ART AND MUSIC, AND I WANT THAT
IN MY LIFE.
I WANT THAT TO BE PART OF OUR
PROGRAM.
THAT'S WHY I CARE ABOUT IT SO
MUCH.
I THINK THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENING
IN OUR WORLD.
WHEN WE TELL PEOPLE EVERY NIGHT
HERE'S WHAT HAPPENED TODAY, I
WANT IT TO BE WHAT THEY EXPECT,
BUT ALSO I WANT TO BRING SOME OF
THIS-- I WANT IT IN MY LIFE.
>> Ifill: WELL, WE ALL WANT IT
AND THAT'S WHY WE'RE SO GLAD
YOU'VE WRITTEN THIS BOOK "THE
NEWS: POEMS."
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Brown: THANK YOU GWEN.
>> WE HAVE A NEWS UPDATE BEFORE
WE GO.
THIS
>> Woodruff: WE HAVE A NEWS
UPDATE BEFORE WE GO.
THIS EVENING, THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES PASSED
LEGISLATION TO END THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY'S BULK
COLLECTION OF AMERICAN'S PHONE
RECORDS, AND REPLACE IT WITH A
SYSTEM THAT WOULD SEARCH DATA ON
A CASE-BY-CASE BASIS.
IT SETS UP A SHOWDOWN WITH THE
SENATE WHERE THERE IS A BILL TO
KEEP THE PROGRAM AS IT IS.
TUNE IN LATER THIS EVENING,
ON CHARLIE ROSE: SENATOR MARCO
RUBIO.
THE REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
HOPEFUL DISCUSSES HIS VISION FOR
AMERICA'S FOREIGN POLICY.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT.
WHAT'S DRIVING BIG COMPANIES
TO RAISE THE WAGES OF THEIR
LOWEST PAID WORKERS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.